hello my fans welcome to the latest
video from Tom rocksbox
and I love mathematics where I'm
answering the questions that have been
sent in and voted for by you guys at
home this week
the winning question is how many
ping-pong balls would it take to raise
the Titanic from the ocean floor now
this may sound a bit silly and a bit
like science fiction but this was a real
theory that was put forward in the 1970s
as a possible method to literally raise
the Titanic from the ocean floor believe
it or not the ping-pong ball idea is one
of the more sensible berries that have
been put forward since it sank in 1912
the Titanic of course was meant to be
unsinkable sort of famous last words and
on its first voyage from Southampton in
the UK sailing to New York in the US
unfortunately an iceberg and was lost at
sea and in the sort of hundred and five
years since various theories have been
put forward about how to raise the ship
from the ocean floor some of the wackier
ones include injecting the ship with
180,000 tons of Vaseline which is
buoyant and so the ship would gently
float to the surface or perhaps
injecting it with liquid nitrogen which
is super super cold and so the whole
ship would freeze as a giant iceberg and
then again floating back up to the
surface there's something poetic about
it iceberg taking it down and then
bringing it back but many of these
wouldn't work for several reasons mainly
being cost it would absolutely cost a
fortune to actually go through with any
of these plans and also we now know that
it's actually heavily damaged the ship
split in two and it's sank and the back
half is almost completely disintegrated
from when it's sank and crashed into the
ocean floor and if we try to move it
it's so fragile that it would basically
now just disintegrate and then that's
not to mention the fact that the whole
site of the wreckage
to be protected by a UNESCO convention
meaning it can't be touched or changed
in any weather to be able to do the
calculation and actually answer the
question we're going to have to make a
lot of assumptions and the first one is
that the Titanic remains in its original
shape so it's still in one piece
and I've got a lovely drawing of the
ship here roughly what it looked like as
far as I can remember and we know of
course its size its dimensions and we
know its weight which is really
important because if we're going to
raise something from the bottom of the
ocean we need to know how heavy it is
and the original weight of the Titanic
is 47 point five million kilograms now
our second major assumption relates to
the reason why this theory actually
failed in terms of trying to really
bring the ship back and that's that the
ping-pong balls would be crushed by the
pressure at the depth where the Titanic
lies so the resting place of the ship
was actually discovered in 1985 it's
around 370 miles off the coast of
Newfoundland Canada and it's at a depth
of 3,800 meters so a very long way down
in the Atlantic Ocean
and at this depth the pressure is
immense so at the surface of the ocean
sort of in the air just around us the
pressure is equal to one atmosphere
which is also the same as 14.6 pounds
per square inch or psi at the depth of
the Titanic the pressure is over 6,000
psi which is quite frankly insane and a
human would definitely be crushed at
this depth and a ping-pong ball without
a doubt would going very long way before
it got to this depth now that we've
discussed the assumptions that we need
to be able to answer this question I'm
going to tell you about the two
mathematical concepts that we need to be
able to actually get the answer and the
first of these
is Archimedes principle now Archimedes
is the guy that you're thinking of this
is a man in ancient Greece who was a
philosopher mathematician scientist and
he did run screaming down the street
Eureka I've solved it completely nude
and the reason he was doing this was he
was taking a bath and he'd actually
figured out how to calculate the
buoyancy of an object and he was so
excited that he figured this out sort of
doing a home experiment in his bathtub
on himself then he just got up and just
ran down the street screaming being just
completely so excited about his
discovery so if we have here our ping
pong ball or just any spherical object
where it is submerged under water there
are two forces acting on that object
there is the weight or the force of
gravity pulling the object down so the
heavier the object is the more that
weight is pulling it down and there's
the buoyancy force which is to do with
the the force sort of pushing the object
up which is why some objects front so a
ping-pong ball for example will float
and that's because the buoyancy force
pushing it up is greater than the weight
of the object pulling it down what
Archimedes had figured out and what
Archimedes principle saves is that the
buoyancy force of an object the force
pushing the object upwards is equal to
the weight of the fluid which has been
displaced by that object so in other
words you take your object you work out
the volume of your object and then you
work out how much that volume of the
fluid which your object is in would
weigh and this is where our second
mathematical concept comes in and that
is how to compute the volume of a sphere
the formula for the volume of a sphere
can be very nicely derived using
integral equation where you change
coordinate systems into spherical polar
coordinates and then you can do the
integral directly but rather than going
through all those steps I'm just going
to quote the formula and I've written it
on the board here the volume of a sphere
of radius R is equal to 4/3 PI R cubed
and so that should be simple enough we
just need to know the radius of a
ping-pong ball and fortunately I've
actually got my own ping-pong ball and
it stays on the ball that the radius
well it tells me the diameter is 40
millimeters so 4 centimeters so the
dynamic set is the distance all the way
across and so the radius the distance
from the center to the edge will be half
the diameter which in this case is 20
millimeters or 2 centimeters so plugging
that into our formula we will get the
volume of a single ping-pong ball so the
volume of one ping pong ball is 33.5
centimeters cubed now that is the amount
of water which is displaced by one
ping-pong ball and according to a media
sprin suppose we need to convert that
into how much 33.5 centimeters cubed of
sea water would weigh now for fresh
water we have a very nice relationship
where one centimeter cubed of water is
equal to one gram in terms of weight
that's how much one centimeter cube of
water weight bearing annex relationship
but of course the Atlantic Ocean is sea
water is salty and salt ions weigh more
than water molecules so those salt ions
that are in there replacing the odd
water molecule to make the water salty
actually weigh a little bit more and
across the world the density of sea
water ranges from one point naught two
to one point naught three grams per
centimeter cubed and for the Atlantic
specifically the answer is one point or
to seven grams per centimeter cubed and
so the weight of sea water that is
displaced by a thing
or ping pong ball is equal to 34.4
ground now going back to our force
diagram remember that we have to
subtract off the weight so this here
this weight of water is equivalent to
the amount of buoyancy the force pushing
our ping-pong ball upwards but of course
the ping-pong ball has a weight pulling
it down and we have to subtract off the
weight of the ball from this value and
again going back to my ping-pong ball it
tells me that it weighs 2.7 grams so our
final answer in terms of the overall
buoyancy force the sort of total force
acting upwards
it's just thirty four point four minus
two point seven so now we are very
nearly there we know the total weight of
the Titanic it's forty seven point five
million kilograms we know the buoyancy
force the total remaining overall
buoyancy force of one ping-pong ball to
be equivalent to thirty one point seven
grams which means a single ping-pong
ball can lift up 31 point 7 grams
converting for seven and a half million
kilograms into grams we have four point
seven five times 10 to the 10 grams
divided by thirty one point seven and
that gives you a final answer of one
point four nine eight billion ping-pong
balls so by any stretch that is a lot of
ping-pong balls on average it costs
around 50 cents also to buy a single
ping-pong ball and so basically meaning
one and a half billion of them means it
would cost around 750 million dollars to
buy all the ping-pong balls that were
required to lift the Titanic from the
ocean floor and that is probably more
money that it would cost just to build a
brand-new Titanic
thank you everybody for watching I hope
that I've answered the question and I
also hope you've had fun please do
subscribe if you like what I do
and also be sure to check out my website
tom rocks maths calm you can also find
me on Facebook Twitter Instagram all
that
Tom rocks maths and I will see you next
time with the answer to another question
that you guys have sent in and voting
for thank you